\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hddscviewer.info
@settitle HDDSCViewer Manual
@c %**end of header

@set UPDATED 15 October 2016
@set VERSION 0.4-alpha

@copying
This manual is for HDDSCViewer (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).

Copyright @copyright{} 2016 Scott Dwyer.

@quotation
This manual is free documentation: you have unlimited permission to copy and
distribute it.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Freeware/Proprietary
@direntry
* HDDSCViewer: (hddscviewer).       Disk progress file graphical viewer
@end direntry

@ifnothtml
@titlepage
@title HDDSCViewer
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Scott Dwyer (@email{sdcomputingservice@@gmail.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents
@end ifnothtml

@node Top
@top HDDSCViewer

This manual is for HDDSCViewer (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).

Home page: www.sdcomputingservice.com

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installing::
* Usage::
* Multilanguage Support::
* Reporting Bugs::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction

HDDSCViewer is a Linux based graphical viewer for inspecting progress log files
created by HDDSuperClone. It is also capable of opening ddrescue log (map)
files.



@node Installing
@chapter Installing
@cindex Installing

HDDSCViewer is supplied as an executable, with separate ones for 32bit
and 64bit.  You CANNOT run the 32bit on a 64 bit system and vice versa
(you may get an odd file not found error if you try).

HDDSCViewer now has DEB (Debian/Ubuntu) and RPM (RedHat/Fedora)
installers available.  If you have downloaded the appropriate installer
then you should just be able to double click on it to start the
installation process.  This method should even work on many live CDs,
but not all.  If you are unable to use one of the installers, then you
will need to follow the instructions below to install from the tar.gz
file or to run without installing.

If you have downloaded the tar.gz file, then the easiest way to get
started is to copy the tar.gz file to a flash drive, and then use simple
copy and paste to put it in the Home folder that can be found on the
desktop of the Linux install.  When you open a terminal it should
default to the same Home folder that is on the desktop.

To extract hddscviewer, open a terminal and use the following
commands (replacing the -x.x.-xxx with proper version number and
architecture):
@example
gunzip hddscviewer-x.x.-xxx.tar.gz
tar xf hddscviewer-x.x.-xxx.tar
@end example

Then navigate to the proper directory:
@example
cd hddscviewer-x.x.-xxx
@end example

The following method to install HDDSCViewer will not only work on a
Linux installation, but you can use the same method when booting from a
live CD. The only difference is that every time you use a live CD, you
will need to perform these steps after each boot.

To install hddscviewer, use the following command:
@example
sudo make install
@end example

The "make install" command needs to be run as root, which is why
"sudo" is included in this example.  Your sysem may use a different
command, or you may already be root.  If it is not ran as root, then you
will likely get permission errors and the install will not be complete.
Note that you can also uninstall it with the command "sudo make
uninstall".  There is now also an uninstaller script that can be ran by
typing "sudo hddscviewer-uninstall.sh".

To run HDDSCViewer from the command line:
@example
hddscviewer
@end example

To run it without installing, you must be in the same directory as
hddscviewer.  Note that some versions of Linux will not allow you to
run a program from certain external devices (such as a FAT32 USB drive).
Example to run it from the current directory:
@example
./hddscviewer
@end example

You may need to change the permissions on the file so that you have
the rights to run it.  The following command should do that:
@example
sudo chmod a+x hddscviewer
@end example

If you are booted from a live CD that does not allow installing with
make (maybe make does not exist) and you are trying to run it from a USB
drive and are getting a permission error, you can copy the executable to
the home folder and run it from there.  Note that if using a live CD the
home folder exists in ram and will be cleared on a reboot.  The
following example assumes you are in the folder on the USB drive that
contains hddscviewer.  The first command copies it to the home folder,
the second command gives permission to execute, and the third command
runs it:
@example
sudo cp hddscviewer /home
sudo chmod a+x /home/hddscviewer
/home/hddscviewer
@end example

Please see the Installing and Usage sections of the manual for more info.



@node Usage
@chapter Usage
@cindex Usage

This program is still in ALPHA stage, and this section of the manual is not
completed yet. But there is not that much to it, so just run it and play with
the options to see what it does.

Since this is a GUI program, it just needs to be started from the command line.
@example
hddscviewer
@end example


@node Multilanguage Support
@chapter Multilanguage Support
@cindex Multilanguage Support

At startup you will have the option to export the current (English) language to
a text file. You can then run that that text file through a translator (such as
Google Translate), and paste the result into a new language text file. Then
choose to import the new language file at startup and all text should be
translated. How well it is translated will depend on the translator. While this
may not be the best method for language translation, it at least gives the end
user the abilty to see the words in their own language, and by way of context
likely figure out how to operate the software.

The imported language file must still have the base formatting in place to be
accepted for import. The example below shows how the formatting should remain
in place. The lines with numbers surrounded by underscores and pipes must stay
intact. Some translators (like the example below) may add spaces between those
characters in the line and that is normally acceptable and can still be
processed during import. However, any missing or misplaced
numbers/underscores/pipes will cause the import to fail.

Exported English:
@example
_HDDSCViewer_0.3-alpha_20160820_
___|0|___
File
___|1|___
Quit
___|2|___
Open
___|3|___
Error!
___|4|___
Warning
@end example

Translated to German:
@example
_HDDSCViewer_0.3-Alpha_20160820_
___ | 0 | ___
Datei
___ | 1 | ___
Verlassen
___ | 2 | ___
Öffnen
___ | 3 | ___
Fehler!
___ | 4 | ___
Warnung
@end example

Please note that the status key window does not translate for all languages
(Chinese and Japanese are known). The characters just turn into square blocks.
This will be worked on in the future. This does not affect the menu.



@node Reporting Bugs
@chapter Reporting Bugs
@cindex Reporting Bugs

It is always possible that there are programming errors in this software. It is
also possible that there are errors and omissions in this documentation. If you
report them, they will get fixed. If you don't report them, they will just stay
the way they are and will not get fixed.

Report bugs to (@email{sdcomputingservice@@gmail.com})

Please include the version number of hddscviewer. You can find the version by
running hddscviewer with the @code{--version} option.






@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye



